[RFC 0180] Remove broken packages or unmaintained leaf packages (#180)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0180-broken-package-removal.md

---
feature: broken-package-removal
start-date: 2024-07-14
author: Jörg "Mic92" Thalheim
co-authors:

> shepherd-team:
> shepherd-leader:

Reviewer: RFCSC:

```suggestion
shepherd-team: @emilazy @preisi @jopejoe1 
shepherd-leader: @jopejoe1 
```

Reviewer: @jopejoe1 we tentatively made you shepherd-leader. If you accept please follow the steps described [here](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs?tab=readme-ov-file#shepherd-leader)

Reviewer 2: Yes, I do accept.

---
feature: broken-package-removal
start-date: 2024-07-14
author: Jörg "Mic92" Thalheim
co-authors:
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
related-issues:
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFCs defines under what conditions we remove broken and unmaintained leaf packages.
The RFC does not have the ambition to define all reasons to remove a package but
instead focuses on simple rules that can be automated.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still cost us valuable time.
Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extend
and unmaintained packages might still have to rebuild when one of their dependencies changes.
Because it is easy to add packages, it should be also easy to remove them, ideally automated

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Broken Packages

> Packages that are marked as broken on all platforms should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.
```

Example: a package that does not build with the most recent Python is technically working on all platforms where the older Python is present.

Author: Sound good. Thanks.

---
feature: broken-package-removal
start-date: 2024-07-14
author: Jörg "Mic92" Thalheim
co-authors:
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
related-issues:
---

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFCs defines under what conditions we remove broken and unmaintained leaf packages.
The RFC does not have the ambition to define all reasons to remove a package but
instead focuses on simple rules that can be automated.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still cost us valuable time.
Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extend
and unmaintained packages might still have to rebuild when one of their dependencies changes.
Removing unmaintained/unused code hopefully increases the overall package quality and helps us
to save resources.
Because it is easy to add packages, it should be also easy to remove them, ideally automated.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

> ## Broken Packages

Reviewer 3: I suggest to create some archive for them both broken and unmaintained.

A bot can save these deleted expressions to another repo, that would be similar to an [overlay](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Overlays).

Reviewer 3: (well, I can do this on [Museoa](https://github.com/museoa/bqn-mode) just because...)

Author: I don't think a bot can do this as it often requires more work to keep packages in a way that also evaluate. However what we can do is link to the pull request that removed the package. This makes it easy to find the code and the nixpkgs revision that still contained the package.

Author: However if you want to do this. Feel free. I don't think this RFC will conflict with this. Depending on how you want to implement this we can also establish some notification mechanism.

> Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally platforms should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally on all platforms should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.
```

> If the package had dependencies, those dependencies are also marked as indirectly broken.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the package had reverse dependencies, those dependencies are also marked as indirectly broken.
```

---
feature: broken-package-removal
start-date: 2024-07-14
author: Jörg "Mic92" Thalheim
co-authors:
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
related-issues:
---

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFCs defines under what conditions we remove broken and unmaintained leaf packages.
The RFC does not have the ambition to define all reasons to remove a package but
instead focuses on simple rules that can be automated.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still cost us valuable time.

> Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extend

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extent
```

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Broken Packages

Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally on all platforms should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.
If the package had reverse dependencies, those dependencies are also marked as indirectly broken.
If they are not functional without the broken package, they should be removed as well.

## Unmaintained packages

Packages with an empty maintainer field that does not have packages depending on it, should
be removed after 2 months. Ideally we have an automation or semi-automation that creates pull requests for that.

If a NixOS module depends on any of removed package, this module gets removed as well, if it is non-functional without the package.
In `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` we can link to the pull request that removed the package,
to make it easier for people to recover the nix expression.

# Examples and Interactions

[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

-

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some maintained packages might still have users that won't be able to use the package,
but the hope is that the removal of unmaintained package will lead to these people

> stepping up as a maintainer. Recovering from the git history should be easy in that case.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if this is worth, but similar to NixOS module deprecation warnings, we could have a warning something along the lines of:
"The package X has been unmaintained for Y weeks. Its removal is scheduled Z weeks from now; if you would like to continue using this package, you're encouraged to help maintain it."

Recovering from the Git history is fine, but it's additional work that could be saved by a small warning like this IMO. If no one cares for the warning, then we know the removal doesn't significantly hurt anyone.

Author: Very good point. I added this to future work as for now I want to focus on policies more rather than implementation. It might be easier to move this to meta though.

Reviewer 3: The Problem framework is perfect for this.

https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/127

In `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` we can link to the pull request that removed the package,
to make it easier for people to recover the nix expression.

In the pull request that removes a package, we also will ping people that have modified/updated the package excluding those that only
touched the package as part of treewide.

# Examples and Interactions

[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

-

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some maintained packages might still have users that won't be able to use the package,
but the hope is that the removal of unmaintained package will lead to these people
stepping up as a maintainer. Recovering from the git history should be easy in that case.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

Keep all packages.

# Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

- Most Linux distributions have rules around removing unmaintained packages i.e. Debian.
- [Nixpkgs eval time is increasing too fast](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/320528):
  This issue discusses how we can improve the evaluation time.

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

?

# Future work

[future]: #future-work

> ?

Reviewer 5: Given we want this process to be automated, this could be writing a GitHub action or similar.

Author: Done.

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFCs defines under what conditions we remove broken and unmaintained leaf packages.
The RFC does not have the ambition to define all reasons to remove a package but
instead focuses on simple rules that can be automated.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still cost us valuable time.
Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extent
and unmaintained packages might still have to rebuild when one of their dependencies changes.
Removing unmaintained/unused code hopefully increases the overall package quality and helps us
to save resources.
Because it is easy to add packages, it should be also easy to remove them, ideally automated.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Broken Packages

Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally platforms should be removed after one full NixOS release cycle.
If the package had dependencies, those dependencies are also marked as indirectly broken.
If they are not functional without the broken package, they should be removed as well.

## Unmaintained packages

Packages with an empty maintainer field that does not have packages depending on it, should

> be removed after 2 months. Ideally we have an automation or semi-automation that creates pull requests for that (see future work).

Reviewer 6: 2 months is a bit too fast, I hope around 6 months

Reviewer 3: It can be made in parallel with ZHF.

Author: To make it simpler, I unified the times for both cases.

If a NixOS module depends on any of removed package, this module gets removed as well, if it is non-functional without the package.
In `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` we can link to the pull request that removed the package,
to make it easier for people to recover the nix expression.

In the pull request that removes a package, we also will ping people that have modified/updated the package excluding those that only
touched the package as part of treewide.

# Examples and Interactions

[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

-

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some maintained packages might still have users that won't be able to use the package,
but the hope is that the removal of unmaintained package will lead to these people
stepping up as a maintainer. Recovering from the git history should be easy in that case.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

> Keep all packages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Keep all packages.
2. Migrate the deleted packages to a NUR-like repo
```

The idea I have proposed before.

# Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

> - Most Linux distributions have rules around removing unmaintained packages i.e. Debian.

Reviewer 3: I usually include a section containing references and links, so that they do not clutter the file.

Can you provide a link for that rule set from Debian?

Author: Done.

---
feature: broken-package-removal
start-date: 2024-07-14
author: Jörg "Mic92" Thalheim
co-authors:
shepherd-team: @emilazy @preisi @jopejoe1

> shepherd-leader: @jopejoe1

Reviewer 7: Starting a YAML value with an `@` is invalid: https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#example-invalid-use-of-reserved-indicators

Author: Is quoting ok?

Reviewer 7: yes, absolutely

(an aside: I notice that something like half of the RFCs in this repo have YAML headers that are invalid in this way already...)

Reviewer 8: good point i constantly notice the little github error

Author: Fixed.

related-issues:
---

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

> This RFC defines conditions under which we remove broken packages or unmaintained leaf packages.

Reviewer 9: It says leaf packages here but later goes on to talk about dependant packages which is contradictory. I assume this was once started for leaf packages only but later widened in scope but you forgot to update the summary?

```suggestion
This RFC defines conditions under which we remove broken packages or unmaintained packages.
```

Reviewer 10: Broken packages with reverse dependencies will be removed. Unmaintained packages with reverse dependencies will not. Perhaps the wording could be clarified.

Reviewer 10: I guess people are interpreting the wording later on in the RFC as not referring solely to unmaintained leaf package, but I can’t speak for @Atemu :)

Reviewer 9: As explained in my initial comments first sentence, that's indeed the source of my confusion. You would not need to handle reverse dependencies if it were only about leaf packages because leaf packages do not have reverse dependencies by definition.

Reviewer 9: Reading the RFC again, the later section only mentions removal of dependent packages of *broken* packages, not unmaintained packages. That's the source of my confusion.

Since this document serves as a guideline for automatic package removal, it also allows for the possibility of removing a package earlier for other reasons.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still consume valuable time.
Broken packages need to be evaluated to some extent, and unmaintained packages might still need to be rebuilt when one of their dependencies changes.
Removing unmaintained or unused code should improve overall package quality and help save resources.
Since adding packages is easy, removing them should also be simple, ideally automated.

# Detailed Design

[design]: #detailed-design

All broken packages or unmaintained leaf packages will be removed after a full NixOS release cycle.
For example, if `hello-unmaintained` is marked as unmaintained in 23.11, it can be removed from master after the 24.05 release.

## Broken Packages

Packages that are unconditionally marked as broken on all platforms are candidates for removal.
If a package has dependent packages, those dependent packages will also be marked as indirectly broken.
If the dependent packages cannot function without the broken package, they should also be removed.

> For example, if a library is broken and an application depends on it, the application will also be removed.

Reviewer 9: Will these follow the same 1 release cycle rule?

If so, that should be explicitly mentioned for clarity.

Author: The paragraph before says:

> All broken packages or unmaintained leaf packages will be removed after a full NixOS release cycle.

Author: Added.

## Unmaintained Packages

> We will add an "unmaintained" warning for all packages with an empty maintainer field that do not have any dependent packages.

Reviewer 9: As I understand it, this "unmaintained" label + warning is what marks a package for removal in the next release but, as it's written, it sounds like any package that does not have maintainers listed is subject for removal in which case we wouldn't need such a label as the empty maintainers field is that label in effect.

This implies that there is a category of packages that have no maintainers but should not be removed which is unfortunately quite common in Nixpkgs. These are often important packages that are, in effect, communally maintained: @r-ryantm PRs are merged without maintainers and sometimes people like i.e. @trofi create PRs updating packages often quite close to the core that have no official maintainer.
   
This problem exacerbated by the recent rounds of maintainers leaving the project. If we had this policy before those events, we would need to remove a large amount of our core packages in 24.11 if we followed this RFC's rules. That's not feasible.

The RFC does not specify how this category of packages should be handled or recognise that it doesn't apply to that case and I think it must do either one of those.

Reviewer 10: Note that the RFC only proposes the removal of unmaintained *leaf* packages, so most of these unmaintained core packages would never be considered for removal under these grounds.

Reviewer 11: we are talking about automated PRs though, right? annoying if a bot keeps opening PRs to remove the same package and we close it

or is the intention to annoy people into maintaining said package? that might be effective... 🤔

Reviewer 10: Automation is deferred to future work, but would presumably detect whether the packages are leaves before opening a PR.

> We will add an "unmaintained" warning for all packages with an empty maintainer field that do not have any dependent packages.

Reviewer 12: How does this mechanism work exactly? How will this work with packages that have broken metadata/no metadata?
I noticed that ofborg doesn't ping maintainers in cases where modifications aren't done in the actual derivation. I.e. if someone updates the source attributes in https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/247cebfe0bb628849a8781be40f193bf622b877b/pkgs/development/tools/pnpm/default.nix, I won't get pinged by ofborg, even though I am a maintainer of the actual derivation.

I have similar concerns with packages that inherit `meta` from another package, as their `meta.position` will probably be broken

Author: The RFC doesn't specify any implementation details. It could be `meta.problems` or some other mechanism. I think we can all agree that it needs to be reliable in the end. This RFCs only sets up a policy what we want to achieve, but not implementation details, because those might change over time and it's hard change existing RFCs to include that.

> We will add an "unmaintained" warning for all packages with an empty maintainer field that do not have any dependent packages.

Author: I don't think this is a good idea to do all at once, because it would create tons of warnings for even basic evaluation. So it's a performance problem and UX problem. But the RFC doesn't prevent this to be done independently. This RFC is about removing packages, not about finding new maintainers for each package.

In the pull request that removes a package, we will also ping the people who have modified or updated the package, excluding those who only touched the package as part of a tree-wide update.

# Examples and Interactions

[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

- A release manager or another contributor marks `packageA` as broken in 23.11, notifying the maintainer.
- They have one full release cycle, as described, to fix `packageA`.
- After the 24.05 release, `packageA` can be automatically removed from the nixpkgs master branch, as outlined in this RFC.

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some unmaintained packages may still have users who will no longer be able to use them, but the hope is that removing unmaintained packages will encourage these users to step up as maintainers.
In such cases, recovering the package from the git history should be relatively easy.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Keep all packages.
- Archive removed nix expressions. Note that this RFC does not prevent this effort from being implemented in addition.

# Prior Art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

> - Most Linux distributions have rules for removing unmaintained packages, e.g., [Debian](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/developers-reference.en.html#orphaning-a-package).
> - Policies in [Gentoo](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Treecleaner), also see [this](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Treecleaner/Policy)
>   and [this](https://devmanual.gentoo.org/ebuild-maintenance/removal/index.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Most Linux distributions have rules for removing unmaintained packages, e.g.:
  - Debian: [Orphaning a package](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/developers-reference.en.html#orphaning-a-package).
  - Gentoo:
    - [Ebuild removal](https://devmanual.gentoo.org/ebuild-maintenance/removal/index.html).
    - [Treecleaner](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Treecleaner)
    - [Treecleaner policy](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Treecleaner/Policy)
 
```

- [Nixpkgs eval time is increasing too fast](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/320528): This issue discusses ways to improve evaluation time.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- FreeBSD Porters Handbook: [13.15. Marking a Port for Removal](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters-handbook/book/#dads-deprecated)
```

# Unresolved Questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

None.

# Future Work

[future]: #future-work

- Develop automation that opens pull requests to remove packages.

> - Add deprecation warnings for packages scheduled for removal to notify potential users.

Reviewer 9: This should make use of the package problems RFC

```Suggestion
- Add deprecation warnings for packages scheduled for removal to notify potential users using [RFC0127 problems](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0127-issues-warnings.md)
```

Author: I don't see rfc0127 implemented anywhere. We can amend it to the RFC, if it ever get implemented.

Reviewer 10: There’s an open PR (https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/338267). Since this is for future work it seems okay to mention. I thought RFC text was supposed to be immutable after approval?

Author: I added it in as an example, but I leave it open if someone else finds a different way instead.

shepherd-leader:
related-issues:
---

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFCs defines under what conditions we remove broken and unmaintained leaf packages.
The RFC does not have the ambition to define all reasons to remove a package but
instead focuses on simple rules that can be automated.
Because this document is just the guideline for automatic package removal,
it also leave it open, that a package can be removed earlier for other reasons.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Broken and unmaintained packages still cost us valuable time.
Broken packages still have to be evaluated to some extent
and unmaintained packages might still have to rebuild when one of their dependencies changes.
Removing unmaintained/unused code hopefully increases the overall package quality and helps us
to save resources.
Because it is easy to add packages, it should be also easy to remove them, ideally automated.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

All packages marked as broken/unmaintained will be removed after a full NixOS release.
For example `hello-unmaintained` will be marked as unmaintained in 23.11 then once we
have 24.05, we can remove it from master.

## Broken Packages

> Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally platforms should are canidates for removal.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
Packages that are marked as broken unconditionally platforms should are candidates for removal.
```

If the package had dependencies, those dependencies are also marked as indirectly broken.
If they are not functional without the broken package, they should be removed as well.

## Unmaintained packages

> We add an unmaintained warning for all packages, with an empty maintainer field that do not have packages depending on it.

Reviewer 14: Would be nice if there was a point where the package is still in `nixpkgs` but it already fails the evaluation (just like `broken` does). That way people might find it easier to step up and maintain the package.

Reviewer 3: This can be implemented by the `meta.problems` infra.

https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/180#issuecomment-2228888320

Author: This feels like a different RFC. We already have broken and use it here. This RFC does not conflict with having other flags that also indicate why something is broken.

> In the pull request that removes a package, we will also ping the people who have modified or updated the package, excluding those who only touched the package as part of a tree-wide update.

Reviewer 9: Nit: "we will" is odd wording here. 

```suggestion
In the pull request that removes a package, the people who have substantially contributed the package declaration before should be pinged.
```

Reviewer 9: Perhaps we should also limit this to people who are still active:

```suggestion
In the pull request that removes a package, the people who have substantially contributed to the package declaration before and are still active in the project should be pinged.
```

Reviewer 9: OTOH, you do want the potentially inactive (it's often unknown what exactly is the case) to be pinged.

What I'm concerned with is people being pinged who have left the project long ago and don't care for packages to be removed they have at one point touched.

Ideally we have an automation or semi-automation that creates pull requests for that (see future work).

If a NixOS module depends on any of removed package, this module gets removed as well, if it is non-functional without the package.
In `pkgs/top-level/aliases.nix` we can link to the pull request that removed the package,
to make it easier for people to recover the nix expression.

In the pull request that removes a package, we also will ping people that have modified/updated the package excluding those that only
touched the package as part of treewide.

# Examples and Interactions

[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

> -

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
- Release manager or other contributior marks `packageA` as broken.
- Automated PR will be opened by bot.
- Notify Maintainer(s) they have one full release cycle as described to fix the package.
- If the package is not fixed it will be removed as described, by merging the PR.
- If the package is fixed. the PR is closed automatically without merging.
```

Author: Slightly adapted and added.

> -

Author: ```suggestion
- Release manager or other contributor marks `packageA` as broken in 23.11 notifying the maintainer.
- They have one full release cycle as described to fix `packageA`.
- After we release of 24.05, the package `packageA` can be removed automatically in nixpkgs master as described in this release in this RFC
```

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some maintained packages might still have users that won't be able to use the package,
but the hope is that the removal of unmaintained package will lead to these people
stepping up as a maintainer. Recovering from the git history should be easy in that case.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Keep all packages.
- Put removed nix expressions in an archive. Note that the this RFC
  does not stop this effort from beeing implemented additionally.

# Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

> - Most Linux distributions have rules around removing unmaintained packages i.e. [Debian](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/developers-reference.en.html#orphaning-a-package).

Reviewer 16: > Note: if a package remains orphaned for a very long time, we will examine the situation to determine if the package is needed anymore — if not, the FTP maintainers will be asked to remove the package from unstable.

The linked Debian policy of removing unmaintained packages is not very clear.

Here is how Gentoo does this, which is somewhat more clear.
- https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Treecleaner/Policy
- https://devmanual.gentoo.org/ebuild-maintenance/removal/index.html

Note that it treats insecure packages similar to broken/unmaintained ones.

> - [Nixpkgs eval time is increasing too fast](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/320528): This issue discusses ways to improve evaluation time.
> 
> - FreeBSD Porters Handbook: [13.15. Marking a Port for Removal](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters-handbook/book/#dads-deprecated)
> # Unresolved Questions

Reviewer 12: nit

```suggestion
- [Nixpkgs eval time is increasing too fast](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/320528): This issue discusses ways to improve evaluation time.
- FreeBSD Porters Handbook: [13.15. Marking a Port for Removal](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters-handbook/book/#dads-deprecated)

# Unresolved Questions
```
